.TH gal 1
.SH NAME
\fBgal\fR \- Run a GALAHAD package on the result of a previously-decoded
SIF file
.SH USAGE
.B gal architecture package
[options]
,

where
.B architecture
is a string of the form machine.os.compiler
indicating the machine/operating system/compiler combination to be used and
.B package
indicates the package required.

The name
.B architecture
must match that of one of the files in the directory
$GALAHAD/bin/sys , while
.B package
may be one of
.LP
.TP 1i
.BI lancelot
LANCELOT B for general nonlinear programming
.TP
.BI nls
NLS for nonlinear least-squares using a regularization method 
.TP
.BI filtrane
FILTRANE for nonlinear equations/inequlaities and nonlinear least-squares
.TP
.BI tru
TRU for unconstrained optimization using a trust-region method
.TP
.BI arc
ARC for unconstrained optimization using a regularization method
.TP
.BI trb
TRB for bound-constrained optimization using a trust-region method
.TP
.BI qp
QP for general quadratic programming
.TP
.BI qpa
QPA for general quadratic programming using an active-set method
.TP
.BI qpb
QPB for general quadratic programming using an interior-point method
.TP
.BI qpc
QPC for general quadratic programming using a cross-over method
.TP
.BI cqp
CQP for convex quadratic programming using an interior-point method
.TP
.BI dqp
DQP for convex quadratic programming using an dual projection method
.TP
.BI ccqp
CCQP for convex quadratic programming using a cross-over method
.TP
.BI l1qp
L1QP for convex l_1 quadratic programming using a cross-over method
.TP
.BI eqp
EQP for equality-constrained quadratic programming
.TP
.BI bqp
BQP for bound-constrained quadratic programming using a projection method
.TP
.BI bqpb
BQPB for bound-constrained quadratic programming using an interior-point method
.TP
.BI lpa
LPA for linear programming using the simplex method
.TP
.BI lpb
LPB for linear programming using an interior-point method
.TP
.BI dlp
DLP for linear programming using an dual projection method
.TP
.BI presolve
PRESOLVE for presolving general linear or quadratic programs
.TP
.BI blls
BLLS for bound-constrained linear least squares using a gradient projection method
.TP
.BI slls
SLLS for simplex-constrained linear least squares using a gradient projection method
.TP
.BI wcp
WCP for well-centered feasible points of a polyhedral region
.TP
.BI trs
TRS for the trust-region subproblem
.TP
.BI rqs
RQS for the regularized quadratic subproblem
.TP
.BI dps
RQS for the diagonilising norm trust-region and regularized quadratic subproblems
.TP
.BI ugo
UGO for univariate global optimization
.TP
.BI bgo
BGO for bound-constrained global optimization using a multi-start trust-region method
.TP
.BI dgo
DGO for bound-constrained global optimization using a deterministic partition-and-bound method

Other packages will be available in due course.

.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
.B gal
runs one of the GALAHAD large-scale nonlinear-optimization
package on the result of a previously decoded
user-defined SIF file.
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
.TP 1i
.BI \-e
Use the load module
.BI architecture.package
if it exits. The default is to create a new load module.
.TP
.B \-h
Print a list of these options and stop execution.
.TP
.BI \-r
Do not recompile the object files for the problem. The default is to recompile
existing problem source files.
.TP
.BI \-u
Update the option specification file to incorporate the latest options.
The default is to leave the file alone (and create it if it does not exist).
.TP
.BI \-s
Run the single precision version of the package. The default is
to run the double precision version.
.TP
.BI \-q
Run the quadruple precision version of the package (if available). 
The default is to run the double precision version.
.TP
.B \-k
Keep the load module after use so that the problem may be rerun without further
compilation. The default is to delete the load module after use.
.TP
.B \-m
Check for memory leaks (if possible).
.TP
.B \-p
Profile the code (if possible).
.TP
.BI \-o " output"
Specify the
.IR output
level, which must be one of
.B 0
(no output; the default)
.B 1
(a brief description of the steps performed)
.TP
.BI \-l " secs"
Set a limit of
.IR secs
seconds on the GALAHAD run. The default is 99999999 seconds.
.SH FILES
.TP 20
.BI architecture.package
executable output file created by gal
.TP
.IB RUN package .SPC
user-supplied option specification file
.TP
.IB OUTSDIF.d
file containing problem structure previously created by sdgal
.TP
.IB AUTOMAT.d
file indicating derivative mode
previously created by sdgal
.TP
.IB SAVEDATA.d
file containing intermediate solution created by gal
.TP
.IB SOLUTION.d
file containing solution created by gal
.TP
.IB SUMMARY.d
file containing summary of solution created by gal
.TP
.IB file.f
Fixed-form Fortran 90 or FORTRAN 77 source decoded from the SIF file
previously created by sdgal
.TP
.IB file.f90
Free-form Fortran 90 source decoded from the SIF file
previously created by sdgal
.TP
.IB file.o
object file created by gal
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
Environment variables may be used to override default external library settings.
By default these are unset, but if required they should be exported after
being set.
.TP
.IB BLASLIB
If there are compiled, library versions of the blas
(basic linear algebra subprograms), set BLASLIB to a list of
names of the object library suffix -lx, where the object library
libx.a contains relevant blas. For instance if the blas are
shared between object libraries libblas1.a and libblas2.a,
BLASLIB should be set to "-lblas1 -lblas2", noting that those in
libblas1.a will take precedence over those in libblas2.a.
If compiled blas are unavailable, BLASLIB should either be unset or set to "".
If the user wishes not to link blas separately, 
for example if they are provided by one of the other external packages, 
set BLASLIB to "-galahad_dummy",
.TP
.IB LAPACKLIB
If there are compiled, library versions of the LAPACK library
set LAPACKLIB to a list of names of the object library suffix -lx,
where the object library libx.a contains relevant lapack. For instance
if LAPACK is shared between object libraries liblapack1.a and liblapack2.a,
LAPACKLIB should be set to "-llapack1 -llapack2", noting that those in
liblapack1.a will take precedence over those in liblapack2.a. If compiled 
lapack are unavailable, LAPACKLIB should either be unset or set to "".
If the user wishes not to link lapack separately, 
for example if they are provided by one of the other external packages, 
set LAPACKLIB to "-galahad_dummy".
.TP
.IB HSLLIB
If there is a compiled, library version of the HSL Mathematical 
Software Library(formerly the Harwell Subroutine Library, 
https://www.hsl.rl.ac.uk/), set HSLLIB to -lx, 
where the object library libx.a contains the relevant HSL packages. 
For instance if the HSL is contained in the object library libhsl.a, 
HSLLIB should be set to "-lhsl". If a compiled version of HSL 
is unavailable, HSLLIB should either be unset or set to "".
N.B. HSL is only required optionally, but is recommended as it provides
considerably improved performace for many GALAHAD packages.
.TP
.IB METISLIB
If there is a compiled, library version of the Metis (versions 4 or 5) graph
partitioning package (http://www-users.cs.umn.edu/~karypis/metis/), set
METISLIB to "-lgalahad_metis4 -lx" ( "-lgalahad_metis5 -lx" for version 5).
where the object library libx.a contains Metis.  For instance
if Metis 5 is contained in the object library libmetis.a, METISLIB should be
set to "-lgalahad_metis5 -lmetis".  If the library is in a "non-standard" 
place, METISLIB should also point to the full path to the library. 
For example, if libmetis.so is in the directory /mylibrary, METISLIB should
be set to "-L/mylibrary -lgalahad_metis5 -lmetis" If a compiled version 
of Metis is unavailable, METISLIB will be set to "-lgalahad_metis_dummy".
N.B. Metis is only required by HSL and some other supported sparse matrix 
packages.
.TP
.IB SPRALLIB
If there is a compiled, library version of the SPRAL sparse factorization
package (http://ccpforge.cse.rl.ac.uk/gf/project/asearchralna/), set SPRALLIB
to -lx, where the object library libx.so contains SPRAL.  For instance if
SPRAL is contained in the object library libspral.so, SPRALLIB should be
set to "-lspral". If the library is in a "non-standard place", SPRALLIB
should also point to the full path to the library. For example, if
libspral.so is in the directory /mylibrary, SPRALLIB should be set to
"-L/mylibrary -lspral" If a compiled version of SPRAL is unavailable,
SPRALLIB will be set to "-lgalahad_spral".
N.B. SPRAL is only optionally required but may improve performance.
In addition, amny parts of SPRAL are included as part of GALAHAD.
.TP
.IB PARDISOLIB
If there is a compiled, library version of the PARDISO sparse factorization
package (http://www.pardiso-project.org/) , set PARDISOLIB to -lx,
where the object library libx.so contains PARDISO.  For instance if PARDISO
is contained in the object library libpardiso.so, PARDISOLIB should be set to
"-lpardiso". If the library is in a "non-standard place", PARDISOLIB should
also point to the full path to the library. For example, if libpardiso.so
is in the directory /mylibrary, PARDISOLIB should be set to
"-L/mylibrary -lpardiso" If a compiled version of PARDISO is unavailable,
PARDISOLIB will be set to "-lgalahad_pardiso".
N.B. PARDISO is only optionally required but may improve performance.
.TP
.IB MKL_PARDISOLIB
If there is a compiled, library version of the MKL version of the PARDISO
sparse factorization package (http://www.pardiso-project.org/) , set
MKL_PARDISOLIB to -lx, where the object library libx.so contains PARDISO. For
instance if PARDISO is contained in the object library libmkl_intel_lp64.a
MKL_PARDISOLIB should be set to "-lmkl_intel_lp64". If the library is in a
"non-standard place", MKL_PARDISOLIB should also point to the full path to the
library. For example, if libmkl_intel_lp64.a is in the directory /mylibrary,
MKL_PARDISOLIB should be set to "-L/mylibrary -lmkl_intel_lp64"
If a compiled version of the MKL version of PARDISO is unavailable,
MKL_PARDISOLIB will be set to "-lgalahad_mkl_pardiso".
N.B. MKL PARDISO is only optionally required but may improve performance.
.TP
.IB WSMPLIB
If there is a compiled, library version of the WSMP sparse factorization
package (http://www.wsmp-project.org/) , set WSMPLIB to -lx,
where the object library libx.so contains WSMPLIB.  For instance if WSMP
is contained in the object library libwsmp.so, WSMPLIB should be set to
"-lwsmp". If the library is in a "non-standard place", WSMPLIB should
also point to the full path to the library. For example, if libwsmp.so
is in the directory /mylibrary, WSMPLIB should be set to
"-L/mylibrary -lwsmp" If a compiled version of WSMP is unavailable,
WSMPLIB will be set to "-lgalahad_wsmp".
N.B. WSMP is only optionally required but may improve performance.
.TP
.IB PASTIXLIB
place-holder for future PaStiX codes.
.TP
.IB MPILIB
place-holder for future MPI codes.
.TP
.IB MUMPSLIB
place-holder for future MUMPS codes.
.TP
.IB UMFPACKLIB
place-holder for future UMFPACK codes.
.TP
.IB SUITESPARSELIB
place-holder for future SuitSparse codes.
.TP
.IB PLPLOTLIB
If the PLplot graphics library is available, some packages optionally
produce grapical output for debugging purposes. The precise list of
link options required may be obtained by executing the command
  pkg-config --cflags --libs plplotd-f95
and PLPLOTLIB should be set to the output of this command.
N.B. PLPLOTLIB is only optionally required.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The diagnostics produced by gal itself are intended to be self-explanatory.
.SH "SEE ALSO"

N. I. M. Gould, D. Orban and Ph. L. Toint,
"GALAHAD - a library of thread-safe fortran 90 packages for large-scale
nonlinear optimization",
.I ACM Transactions on Mathematic Software
.B 29
(4)
(2003) 353-372.

A. R. Conn, N. I. M. Gould and Ph. L. Toint,
"LANCELOT: a Fortran package for large-scale nonlinear optimization" ,
Springer Series in Computational Mathematics, vol. 17,
Springer Verlag (Heidelberg, New York),
ISBN 3-540-55470-X, 1992.

N. I. M. Gould, S. Leyffer and Ph. L. Toint,
``A multidimensional filter algorithm for nonlinear equations and nonlinear
least-squares",
.I SIAM Journal on Optimization
.B 15
(1)
(2005) 17-38.

N. I. M. Gould and Ph. L. Toint,
"Numerical methods for large-scale non-convex quadratic programming",
in "Trends in Industrial and Applied Mathematics",
(A. Siddiqi and M. Kocvara, eds.),
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands
(2002) 149-179.

N. I. M. Gould and Ph. L. Toint,
"An iterative working-set method for large-scale non-convex quadratic
programming",
.I Applied Numerical Mathematics
.B 43
(1-2)
(2002) 109-128.

A. R. Conn, N. I. M. Gould, D. Orban and Ph. L. Toint,
"A primal-dual trust-region algorithm for non-convex nonlinear optimization".
.I Mathematical Programming ,
.B 87
(2)
(2000) 215-249.

.BR sdgal (1)
.SH BUGS
Please report any bugs found to "nick.gould@stfc.ac.uk", along with any
suggestions for improvements.
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Gould, STFC-Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,
Dominique Orban, Polytechnique Montréal,
and
Philippe Toint, University of Namur
