.\" @(#)GALAHAD/AMPL v1.0 03/2003;
.TH gampl 1 "22 Mar 2003"
.SH NAME
gampl \- AMPL interface to the GALAHAD Optimization Library.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBgampl\fP \fIarchitecture\fP [\-=] [\-h]
[\-l secs] [\-e] [\-s] [\-v] [\-\-] \fIprob\fP [\fIpkg\fP=1] [\fIstats\fP=1]

where \fIarchitecture\fP is a string of the form machine.os.compiler
indicating the machine/operating system/compiler combination to be
used.

The name \fIarchitecture\fP must match that of one of the files in the
directory $GALAHAD/ampl_bin/ .

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIgampl\fP interfaces packages in the GALAHAD Optimization Library
[1,2] with the AMPL Library [3], allowing solution of optimization
problems modeled in the AMPL modeling language [4]. The available
solvers are \fIQPA\fP, \fIQPB\fP, \fIPRE\fP, \fIFILTRANE\fP and \fILANCELOT
B\fP (see below for description). The \fIgampl\fP interface may be invoked
from the command line or from within an AMPL session, in which case
a sample invokation looks like (in the following commands, \fIampl:\fP
represents the AMPL prompt, and $GALAHAD is the full path name
corresponding to the GALAHAD environment variable)
.TP
  \fIampl:\fP model \fIprob\fP.mod;
.TP
  \fIampl:\fP data \fIprob\fP.dat;
.TP
  \fIampl:\fP option solver $GALAHAD/ampl_bin/\fIarchitecture\fP;
.TP
  \fIampl:\fP option galahad_options "qpa=1";
.TP
  \fIampl:\fP solve;

.LP 
.SH OPTIONS
From within an AMPL session, options may be set using the syntax

  \fIampl:\fP option \fIkeyword\fP=\fIvalue\fP.

You can start gampl from the command line with the following options:
.TP 5
.B \fIprob\fP
name, without the \fI.nl\fP extension, of the problem to be
solved. \fIprob.nl\fP must have been produced by Ampl beforehand using
one of the two following commands

\fBampl -og\fP\fIprob\fP \fIprob\fP\fB.mod\fP [\fIprob\fP\fB.dat\fP]

\fBampl -ob\fP\fIprob\fP \fIprob\fP\fB.mod\fP [\fIprob\fP\fB.dat\fP]

Note that this causes AMPL to write a \fIprob\fP.sol file. Refer to
the AMPL documentation for more information.
.TP
.B \fIpkg\fP
Solve problem specified by \fIprob\fP using the package \fIpkg\fP from
the GALAHAD Library. Currently accepted values of \fIpkg\fP are

\fIqpa\fP to use the active set quadratic programming package QPA,

\fIqpb\fP to use the primal-dual interior-point quadratic programming
package QPB,

\fIpre\fP to use the quadratic program preprocessor PRESOLVE,

\fIfilt\fP to use the filter method for feasibility problems FILTRANE,

\fIlanb\fP to use the augmented-Lagrangian nonlinear programming
package LANCELOT-B.

The default is \fIqpb\fP. Refer to
GALAHAD-specific documentation for more information on these packages.
.TP
.B \fIstats\fP
Causes detailed statistics on the problem, its variables and
constraints to be output at the end of the run.
.TP
.B \-h
Displays a usage message and stop.
.TP
.B \-=
Displays a list of \fIkeyword=value\fP possibilities.
.TP
.B \-e
Disables echoing of \fIkeyword=value\fP assignments.
.TP
.BI \-l " secs"
Set a limit of
.IR secs
seconds on the GALAHAD run. The default is 99999999 seconds.
.TP
.BI \-s
Writes a \fIprob\fP.sol file
.TP
.BI \-v
Displays version information and stop.
.TP
.B \--
Indicates the end of options.
.SH GALAHAD-specific options
Each GALAHAD package may read execution options from a specification file.
Please refer to package-specific
documentation to pass options by means of its specification file.
.SH FILES
.TP
.IB RUN pkg .SPC
User-supplied option specification file.
.TP
$GALAHAD/ampl_bin/\fIarchitecture\fP
GALAHAD-AMPL object file for the required \fIarchitecture\fP.
.SH ENVIRONMENT 
.TP
.SB GALAHAD
Main GALAHAD installation directory.
.SH AUTHORS
Nick Gould, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, 
Dominique Orban, Ecole Polytechnique,
and
Philippe Toint, University of Namur
.SH "REFERENCES"
.TP 5
.B [1]
\fIGALAHAD: A library of thread-safe Fortran 90 packages for
large-scale nonlinear optimization\fP, N.I.M. Gould, D. Orban and
Ph.L. Toint, 2002.
.TP
.B [2]
\fIhttp://galahad.rl.ac.uk/galahad-www/\fP
.TP
.B [3]
\fIhttp://netlib.bell-labs.com/netlib/ampl/\fP
.TP
.B [4]
\fIhttp://www.ampl.com/\fP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
sdgal(1), gal(1)
